Add URL Protocol Handler article (#5191)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/url-protocol-handler/index.md

---
layout: post

> title: URL protocol handler registration for installed PWAs

Author: ```suggestion
title: URL protocol handler registration for PWAs
```

subhead: |
  Let installed PWAs handle links that use a specific protocol for a more integrated experience.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-05-05
description: |
  After registering a PWA as a protocol handler, when a user clicks on a hyperlink with a specific

>   scheme such as mailto, ms-word, or web+music from a browser or a platform-specific app,

Author: I was wondering about this, but since it was mentioned in the Explainer, I used it in the article. You might want to update the Explainer accordingly then (or add a remark that this is a potential future addition).

(for example, `mailto`, `bitcoin`, or `magnet`) or begin with `web+`, followed by at least one or
more lowercase ASCII letters after the `web+` prefix, for instance, `web+coffee`.

To make this clearer, here is a concrete example of the flow:

1. The user visits a site at `https://coffeeshop.example.com/` that makes the following call:
   `navigator.registerProtocolHandler('web+coffee', 'coffee?type=%s')`.
1. At a later point, while visiting `https://randomsite.example.com/`, the user clicks on a link
   such as `<a href="web+coffee:latte-macchiato">All about latte macchiato</a>`.
1. This causes the browser to navigate to the following URL:
   `https://coffeeshop.example.com/coffee?type=web%2Bcoffee%3A%2F%2Flatte-macchiato`. The search
   string URL-decoded then reads `?type=web+coffee://latte-macchiato`.

## What this proposal is about

The present _URL protocol handler registration for PWAs_ proposal is about offering protocol handler
registration as part of a PWA installation through its manifest. After registering a PWA as a
protocol handler, when a user clicks on a hyperlink with a specific scheme such as `mailto` ,

> `ms-word`, or `web+music` from a browser or a platform-specific app, the registered PWA will open

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bitcoin`, or `web+music` from a browser or a platform-specific app, the registered PWA will open
```

and receive the URL. It is important to note that both the proposed manifest-based registration and
the traditional `registerProtocolHandler()` play very similar roles in practice, while still
allowing the possibility for complementary user-experiences:

- Similarities include requirements around the list of schemes allowed to be registered, and
  the name and format of parameters, etc.
- Differences in the manifest-based registration are subtle, but might be useful to enhance the

>   experience for PWA users. For example, manifest-based PWA registration may not require an

Reviewer: For security/privacy reasons we will always require additional user action, but it will be when invoking a link that is handled by an app. It will be in the form of a permission dialog (i.e.: allow or cancel) or a disambiguation dialog (i.e.: the open with dialog on Windows). Not sure if you want to talk about those cases in this document but it might be useful. If so we could help with screenshots and etc.

Reviewer: [edit 1]: Ah, I see you talk about this further below.

Author: The Explainer is structured similarly.

  additional user action apart from the user-initiated installation of the PWA.

### Use cases

- In a word processing PWA, the user in a document encounters a link to a presentation like

>   `ms-powerpoint://deck2378465`. When the user clicks on the link, the presentation PWA

Reviewer: Another protocol that hasn't made into the safelist yet. Maybe replace with the coffee/tea example you have? Or just do web+powerpoint?

Author: I'll use a neutral presentation software term.

Author: (Again this comes straight from the Explainer, similar to above, you might want to update accordingly.)

>   `ms-powerpoint://deck2378465`. When the user clicks on the link, the presentation PWA

Author: ```suggestion
  `web+presentations://deck2378465`. When the user clicks on the link, the presentation PWA
```

  automatically opens in the correct scope and shows the slide deck.
- In a platform-specific chat app, the user in a chat message receives a link to a `magnet` URL.
  Upon clicking the link, an installed torrent PWA launches and starts downloading.
- The user has a music streaming PWA installed. When a friend shares a link to a song like
  `web+music://songid=1234&time=0:13` and the user clicks on it, the music streaming PWA will
  automatically launch in a standalone window.

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |

> | 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [In Progress][specification]              |
```

`web+coffee`. The values are strings containing the URL of the handler with the required `%s`
placeholder for the escaped URL.

```json
{
  "protocol_handlers": [
    {
      "protocol": "web+tea",
      "url": "/tea?type=%s"
    },
    {
      "protocol": "web+coffee",
      "url": "/coffee?type=%s"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Multiple apps registering for the same protocol

If multiple applications register themselves as handlers for the same scheme, for example, the
`mailto` protocol, the operating system will show the user a picker and let them decide which of the
registered handlers to use.

### The same app registering for multiple protocols

The same app can register itself for multiple protocols, as you can see in the code sample above.

### App updates and handler registration

Handler registrations are synchronized with the latest manifest version provided by the app. There
are two cases:

* An update that adds new handlers triggers handler registration (separate from app installation).
* An update that removes handlers triggers handler unregistration (separate from app
   uninstallation).

## Demo

You can see a demo of URL protocol handler registration for PWAs on Glitch.

> 1. Go to [https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/](https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/), install the

Reviewer: Not sure if we want to remind readers that step 0 is enabling the flag.

Author: I'll add it here and to the demo.

> 1. Go to [https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/](https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/), install the

Author: ```suggestion
1. If you have not done so before, [enable the flag](#enabling-via-chrome:flags).
1. Go to [https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/](https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/), install the
```

constraint. The list of registered protocol handlers is not exposed to the web in any way so it
cannot be used as a fingerprinting vector.

### Non user-initiated navigation attempts

Navigation attempts that are not initiated by the user, but that are programmatic, may not open
apps. The custom protocol URL may only be used in top-level browsing contexts, but not, for example,
as the URL of an iframe.

### Allowlist of protocols

Just like with `registerProtocolHandler()` there is an allowlist of protocols that apps can register
to handle.

### Default protocol handlers

Registration of PWA protocol handlers will not take over the default handler for a protocol.
Instead, the next time the protocol is invoked, an operating system disambiguation dialog will
prompt the user to either keep using the default handler or select the newly registered handler.

### Consent prompt

On the first launch of the PWA due to an invoked protocol, the user will be presented with a
permission dialog. This dialog will display the app name and origin of the app, and ask the user if
the app is allowed to handle links from the protocol. If a user rejects the permission dialog, the

> protocol handler is unregistered with the operating system.

Reviewer: This is outdated. The only way to unregister protocols for web apps is by uninstalling the app. Cancelling the consent prompt merely closes it. The user consent will be saved in prefs if they click allow.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1686833/117515587-8e50cc80-af4b-11eb-905a-78ef7f9a87fb.png)

Author: I have updated this accordingly.

> the app is allowed to handle links from the protocol. If a user rejects the permission dialog, the
> protocol handler is unregistered with the operating system.

Author: ```suggestion
the app is allowed to handle links from the protocol. If a user rejects the permission dialog, the
registered protocol handler will be ignored by the operating system.
To unregister the protocol handler, the user needs to uninstall the PWA that registered it.
```

or properties that you need to implement your idea? Have a question or comment on the security
model? File a spec issue on the corresponding [GitHub repo][github], or add your thoughts to an
existing issue.

### Report a problem with the implementation

Did you find a bug with Chromium's implementation? Or is the implementation different from the spec?
File a bug at [new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Be sure to include as much detail as you can,
simple instructions for reproducing, and enter `UI>Browser>WebAppInstalls` in the **Components**
box. [Glitch](https://glitch.com/) works great for sharing quick and easy repros.

### Show support for the API

Are you planning to use URL protocol handler registration for PWAs? Your public support helps the
Chromium team prioritize features and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support
them.

Share how you plan to use it on the [WICG Discourse thread][wicg-discourse]. Send a Tweet to
[@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag
[`#ProtocolHandler`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ProtocolHandler&src=recent_search_click&f=live)
and let us know where and how you're using it.

## Useful links

> - [Explainer][explainer]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Explainer][explainer]
- [Spec proposal][specification]
```

- [GitHub][github]
- [ChromeStatus](https://chromestatus.com/feature/5151703944921088)
- [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1019239)
- [TAG review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/482)
- [Discourse][wicg-discourse]

## Acknowledgements

URL protocol handler registration for PWAs was specified by
[Fabio Rocha](https://www.linkedin.com/in/fabiorochap/),
[Connor Moody](https://www.linkedin.com/in/connor-d-moody/), and
[Samuel Tang](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tangsamuel/) from the Microsoft Edge team. This article
was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley). Hero image by
[JJ Ying](https://unsplash.com/@jjying) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/PDxYfXVlK2M).

[explainer]:
  https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/URLProtocolHandler/explainer.md

> [github]: https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/tree/main/URLProtocolHandler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[specification]: https://github.com/w3c/manifest/pull/972
[github]: https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/tree/main/URLProtocolHandler
```

---
layout: post
title: URL protocol handler registration for PWAs
subhead: |
  Let installed PWAs handle links that use a specific protocol for a more integrated experience.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-05-10

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-05-11
```

### Show support for the API

Are you planning to use URL protocol handler registration for PWAs? Your public support helps the
Chromium team prioritize features and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support
them.

Share how you plan to use it on the [WICG Discourse thread][wicg-discourse]. Send a Tweet to
[@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag
[`#ProtocolHandler`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ProtocolHandler&src=recent_search_click&f=live)
and let us know where and how you're using it.

## Useful links

- [Explainer][explainer]
- [Spec proposal][specification]
- [GitHub][github]
- [ChromeStatus](https://chromestatus.com/feature/5151703944921088)
- [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1019239)
- [TAG review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/482)
- [Discourse][wicg-discourse]

## Acknowledgements

URL protocol handler registration for PWAs was implemented and specified by
[Fabio Rocha](https://www.linkedin.com/in/fabiorochap/),
[Diego González](https://www.linkedin.com/in/diekus/),
[Connor Moody](https://www.linkedin.com/in/connor-d-moody/), and
[Samuel Tang](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tangsamuel/) from the Microsoft Edge team. This article

> was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley). Hero image by

Author: ```suggestion
was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley) and Fabio Rocha. Hero image by
```

---
layout: post

> title: URL protocol handler registration for installed PWAs

Author: It only works for installed PWAs, so I thought mentioning it right in the heading was the right thing to do.

> title: URL protocol handler registration for installed PWAs

Reviewer 2: OK... but nothing works for _uninstalled_ PWAs, so I still don't see what this adds.

> title: URL protocol handler registration for installed PWAs

Author: Let me remove the word "installed" then.

  Upon clicking the link, an installed torrent PWA launches and starts downloading.
- The user has a music streaming PWA installed. When a friend shares a link to a song like
  `web+music://songid=1234&time=0:13` and the user clicks on it, the music streaming PWA will
  automatically launch in a standalone window.

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with URL protocol handler registration for PWAs locally, without an origin trial
token, enable the `#enable-desktop-pwas-protocol-handling` flag in `chrome://flags`.

## How to use URL protocol handler registration for PWAs

> The API of the URL protocol handler registration for PWAs feature is modeled closely along the
> existing API of `navigator.registerProtocolHandler()`. Just this time the information is passed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API for URL protocol handler registration is modeled closely on  
`navigator.registerProtocolHandler()`. Just this time the information is passed
```

> declaratively via the Web Application Manifest in a new property `"protocol_handlers"` that takes an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
declaratively via the Web Application Manifest in a new property called `"protocol_handlers"` that takes an
```

array of objects with the two required keys `"protocol"` and `"url"`. The code snippet below shows

> the relevant excerpt of a Web Application Manifest that would register the protocols `web+tea` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
how to register `web+tea` and
```

`web+coffee`. The values are strings containing the URL of the handler with the required `%s`

> placeholder that will be replaced with the escaped URL to be handled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
placeholder for the escaped URL.
```

```json
{
  "protocol_handlers": [
    {
      "protocol": "web+tea",
      "url": "/tea?type=%s"
    },
    {
      "protocol": "web+coffee",
      "url": "/coffee?type=%s"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Multiple apps registering for the same protocol

If multiple applications register themselves as handlers for the same scheme, for example, the
`mailto` protocol, the operating system will show the user a picker and let them decide which of the
registered handlers to use.

### The same app registering for multiple protocols

The same app can register itself for multiple protocols, as you can see in the code sample above.

### App updates and handler registration

Handler registrations are synchronized with the latest manifest version provided by the app. There
are two cases:

> 1. An update that adds new handlers triggers handler registration (separate from app installation).
> 1. An update that removes handlers triggers handler unregistration (separate from app
>    uninstallation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* An update that adds new handlers triggers handler registration (separate from app installation).
* An update that removes handlers triggers handler unregistration (separate from app
   uninstallation).
```

## Demo

You can see a demo of URL protocol handler registration for PWAs on Glitch.

1. Go to [https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/](https://protocol-handler.glitch.me/), install the
   PWA, and reload the app after the installation. The browser has now registered the PWA as a
   handler for the `web+coffee` protocol with the operating system.
1. In the installed PWA window, click on the link
   [https://protocol-handler-link.glitch.me/](https://protocol-handler-link.glitch.me/). This will
   open a new browser tab with three links. Click on the first or the second (latte macchiato or
   americano). The browser will now show you a prompt and ask if you are fine with the app being a

>    protocol handler for the `web+coffee` protocol. If you agree, the PWA will open and show the

Reviewer 2: We're really asking users to judge whether schemes can be used?

Reviewer 2: Or is it presented in a non-technical way?

Author: This is what it looks like:

<img width="313" alt="Screen Shot 2021-05-06 at 10 00 47" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/145676/117262839-f6bb8300-ae51-11eb-8164-9fb2a007de8e.png">

Note that the pitch for the feature the article is about is that there would be _no_ prompt, but the installation per se would be seen as the user being fine with the registration happening.

Author: (To clarify: the image above is for the JS-based registration.)

Reviewer: That's correct, this is for JS-based registration but we will have a similar experience on the first time a protocol handler for a web app is invoked. This was a requirement from security/privacy folks.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1686833/117515279-a116d180-af4a-11eb-9272-40b9e41dd23c.png)

Reviewer: [Edit 1]: I now see this is also below. Apologies. I'm reviewing this as I read it :-)

   selected coffee.
1. To compare with the traditional flow that uses `navigator.registerProtocolHandler()`, click
   the \*_Register protocol handler_ button in the PWA. Then in the browser tab click the third link
   (chai). It will likewise show a prompt, but then open the PWA in a tab, not in a browser window.
1. Send yourself a message on a platform-specific application like Skype on Windows
   with a link like `<a href="web+coffee://americano">Americano</a>` and click it. It should
   likewise open the installed PWA.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/lfjgVAiGjVE9VohX3EDs.png", alt="URL protocol handler demo with browser tab with links on the left, and standalone PWA window on the right.", width="800", height="461" %}

## Security considerations

> Since PWA installation requires the context to be secure, the present feature inherits this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since PWA installation requires the context to be secure, protocol handling inherits this
```

constraint. The list of registered protocol handlers is not exposed to the web in any way so it
cannot be used as a fingerprinting vector.

### Non user-initiated navigation attempts

Navigation attempts that are not initiated by the user, but that are programmatic, may not open
apps. The custom protocol URL may only be used in top-level browsing contexts, but not, for example,
as the URL of an iframe.

### Allowlist of protocols

Just like with `registerProtocolHandler()` there is an allowlist of protocols that apps can register

> to become the handler for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to handle.
```

### Default protocol handlers

Registration of PWA protocol handlers will not take over the default handler for a protocol.
Instead, the next time the protocol is invoked, an operating system disambiguation dialog will
prompt the user to either keep using the default handler or select the newly registered handler.

### Consent prompt

On the first launch of the PWA due to an invoked protocol, the user will be presented with a
permission dialog. This dialog will display the app name and origin of the app, and ask the user if

> the app is allowed to handle links from the protocol. If a user rejects the permission dialog, the

Reviewer 2: Again, how is this presented? If I'm usability minded, I might be disinclined to use this.

Author: It shows a prompt if the PWA should be used (every time) to handle links of the given protocol. I can't seem to reset the state after saying "every time", so can't show a screenshot.

Reviewer 2: I'm satisfied now that this is fine. Would a web developer have the same concern as me? Would it be worth mentioning in passing that this will be presented in a user-friendly way? I totally admit this is a judgement call.

Author: To be quite honest I don't think regular users will understand what this is about (by the pure nature of the thing). But then on the other side, platform-specific apps like YouTube (the Android app) register themselves as handlers, so users are used to this kind of behavior where an app launches when a link is clicked (despite knowing that youtube.com as a website exists in a parallel world).
